Retail Rules of Thumb
▪

Five parking spaces per thousand.

▪

Shop space (a small tenant’s typical size is 1,000 to 2,500 sf). Beware of space too deep as tenants
can’t use the deep space (60-80 feet deep and 20 feet wide is ok).

▪

Beware of too many pads. Developer may sell off pads at a premium but that reduces visibility into
the center for the shop tenants.

▪

Food and drug anchored center has grocery store and drug store on long term flat lease of say 25
years with multiple five-year extension options at same rate. Rent covers developer’s cost (i.e.,
minimal return on cost at say financing rate). There may be a percentage clause (additional rent as
percent of sales) but not often met by anchor tenants.

▪

The real “juice” for the developer and investor is in the shop space. Typical lease term is 5 years.

▪

Evaluate sales volumes. Rent should not be greater than 10% of sales.

▪

Take a look at an aerial to see if trade area is built out. Are there any “corners” available for
competition to enter the marketplace? If sales are high and the site is “in-fill”, then the location is
strong.

▪

What is the population density and median income level in the trade area (typically 1.5 miles)? Most
sales packages have a pile of demographic information. Is the median income above or below the
metropolitan area? Dense trade area with above average median incomes is good. If income is too
high, more likely to be lower density which is not good.

▪

Beware of too much shop space. Increasingly category killers such as Wal-Mart or super grocery
stores render mom and pop merchants redundant. Vacancy in a shopping center is death. It is visible
(as compared to office or apartment). If a space can’t be rented, then that affects the neighboring
tenant.

▪

Look for anchor tenant placement that builds traffic across the shop space.

▪

Tenant mix is important. Destination tenants that don’t generate comparison shopping such as H and
R Block (remember they shut down for 8 months of the year) and travel agent don’t build foot
traffic. They can be hidden somewhere in a less prominent area of the center.

▪

Beware of the Wal-Mart effect. Many a grocery anchored center will fail as WalMart opens its super
centers.

▪

Look for centers on the “going home” side. People returning from work can take a right turn in and
out.

▪

Look at traffic volumes in both directions. These are public information.

148

▪

Shopping center NOI doesn’t grow rapidly because much of the income stream is on long term fixed
leases. Only a portion of the income stream is “hedged”. The anchors provide security and bondlike returns, but little if any upside.

▪

Typical FAR (floor area ratio) is 25% (lower than office because single story and higher parking and
circulation required for loading access at rear of property).

149

